welcome to topcast and to my fourth
episode in the series things that make
you go hmm I'm up to Minds today there's
a part of the conversation between Max
tegmark and Sam Harris where in their
first conversation right towards the end
about 15 minutes towards the end they
start talking about Ai and all the
dangers thereof and it was very
interesting that they didn't consider
the true nature of what a mind is they
circled around it happily they did have
a second conversation and they explored
these issues further and I think they
almost got there but never quite hit the
bullseye never quite got to the idea of
what we talk about here of a mind in a
person being the thing that can explain
they talked about learning without ever
really grasping what learning actually
is as far as we understand it so the
format for today is similar to previous
episodes with a subtle difference I'm
going to look at that 15 min at the end
of the first conversation take out a few
Snippets here and there and then move
into the second conversation they had
but just take the first few minutes of
that conversation as well I'm not
certainly not going to take the whole
thing and the reason is you get a flavor
for where they're going you get the idea
and you get the idea that they're not
really grasping what we understand
knowledge and the papyrian senses which
is what you need if you are going to try
and understand what understanding is
understand what learning is and
therefore have a conception about the
difference between systems which can
learn in the sense that we talk about it
conjecturing explanations and trying to
refute them and if you fail to do so
then you've learned something and those
other systems that are programmed to
follow instructions the Stark difference
between a i and AGI and an AGI is just a
person now if you don't get this one
reason for not getting this is not
understanding what a person is and the
relationship between people people and
knowledge and so this is what slows down
and undermines the arguments are being
made here what I would say is and it
does sound pejorative but there's no way
of getting around that this is purely
vanilla mainstream thinking on this
issue when it comes to what Sam and Max
are talking about today this is what
scientists are talking about at least to
my mind and to my ear there are some
more reasonable voices on this and they
tend to get dismissed and here I'm not
necessarily talking about David Deutsch
I'm talking about people who will get
mentioned in this particular episode
people like Neil deGrasse Tyson Neil
deGrasse Tyson aside from being a great
science Communicator is a very rational
sober person when it comes to some of
these mysterious but interesting issues
of our time things like is that thing a
UFO things like is that robot going to
take over the world he has some common
sense ways of talking about this but
people don't take him seriously and they
should they should because he likes to
consider things like what do we know so
far should we be solving that problem
now or is that going to be a problem for
the future which is one of the things
I've been interested in lately rather
than people focusing on the problems
that we have right now they're trying to
guess at the problems that descendants
will have they're not problems for us
now they're problems for either Us in
decades to come or our descendants does
this mean we shouldn't prepare for the
future of course we should prepare for
the future but pretending to know
exactly what the future is going to hold
that's just pure prophecy and it always
leads to pessimism for reasons I've said
on the podcast elsewhere I'm also very
concerned in this part of the
conversation between Sam and Max that
when the epistemology goes wrong perhaps
not even necessarily wrong simply
missing altogether from the conversation
any conception about knowledge and how
it's constructed then everything else
begins to go wrong as well you can kind
of get by and science to some extent
without having a clear understanding of
epistemology you can still go out into
the world with your ideas and test those
ideas against the world even if you
don't really know what you're doing it's
kind of like as I've said before the
difference between a pilot and an
engineer a pilot has some understanding
of how the engines work granted but
they're not the person who's going to
fix the engines they're not the person
who's really going to fully be able to
explain what's going on in order to
provide the thrust it's better if they
do have a better understanding but they
don't need that great understanding in
order to get from A to B so too with the
scientists most of the time however now
and again the plane might break down and
now and again you might not have an
engineer there and wouldn't it be good
if the pilot could fix the plane these
are the situations we sometimes get into
and one of those situations is this
issue of AGI which I kind of think right
now isn't exactly an issue it's not a
problem for anyone except those people
engaged in trying to find the program
for the AGI but as we say what they
really are doing at the moment or should
be doing at least is the philosophy of
learning trying to figure out how a
machine can become a general purpose
explainer instead they're working on
narrow Ai and even when you start adding
the narrow AI together you just get a
narrow AI That's capable of doing
multiple things it's still Arrow though
and we'll see that misconception today
as well so when the epistemology goes
wrong the science can go wrong the
philosophy goes wrong but perhaps more
significantly and we will hear this in
the second conversation they have the
morality goes wrong as well and it's
really concerning when the morality goes
wrong now say it's really concerning but
we'll hear why when we get there but for
now let me turn it over to that last
part of their first conversation to
where Sam begins to broach the topic
with Max now when I was listening to
this for the umpteenth time I thought to
myself how am I going to be able to turn
this into a podcast because it's going
to be a lot of stop and start almost
every single sentence they speak on this
topic contains some misconception or
other so we'll see how we go try to bear
with me so with that let's push on
[Music]
I think there's a good bridge to AI
where which is where you and I met at
the conference that you organized
through your Institute one question I
have for you is you know I came away
from that conference really I came into
that conference really as a as an utter
novice on this topic I had just more or
less ignored AI having accepted the
rumors that they're more or less no
progress had been made all the promises
had been overblown and there was not
much to worry about and it was kind of a
just a dead end scientifically and then
I heard you know our mutual friend Elon
Musk and other people like Stephen
Hawking worrying out loud about the
prospect of of AI and very much in the
in the near term you know whether
whether it's five years or 50 years
we're talking about in a time frame that
that any rational person certainly any
rational person who has kids could worry
about could make you know huge gains
which could well destroy us if we don't
anticipate the ways in which machines
more intelligent than ourselves could
fail to converge with our interests and
could fail to be controllable ultimately
controllable by us I've mentioned this
on the podcast a few times and and I've
recommended Nick bostrom's book on this
topic super intelligence which is really
a great summary of of the problem so I
my question for you is you and I both
answered the The Edge question my
response to which is also on my blog The
Edge question was on this topic right
after the conference in San Juan that
you organized and I noticed that there
are many smart people many of whom
should be very close to this the data
here who are really deeply skeptical
that there's anything to worry about
here I mean so friends and colleagues of
of mine and perhaps yours like the
Stephen Pinker and Lawrence Krauss take
a very different line here and more or
less have said that concerns about AI
are totally overblown and that there's
no reason to think that that there
should be safety concerns that will just
kind of get into the end zone and I mean
they're basically basically treat in it
like the Y2K scare and I'm just
wondering what what you think about that
and what accounts for that
okay so there we have a very good
introduction of Sam's position so he
came in not knowing too much about this
issue he went to a conference and he was
persuaded and there were people at that
conference he says like Elon Musk and
Stephen Hawking voicing their concerns
about this now this is interesting this
is I think something to do with Sam's
conception of intelligence full stop
clearly Elon Musk is an accomplished
person clearly Stephen Hawking is a very
accomplished person in different ways
but kind of to the same level in a
certain sense her Elon Musk has
profoundly changed the world through
engineering and through earning a heck
of a lot of money because he's an
excellent business person so brilliant
in that respect Stephen Hawking on the
other hand has achieved a similar degree
of Fame across the world for some
amazing work in cosmology and black
holes general relativity quantum theory
some people saw him as the successor to
Einstein these people are intelligent
but I would say in my conception of
intelligence they have the same kind of
quality that all humans share this
ability to explain the world and to have
particular interests and to excel at
those particular interests not everyone
shares the interest Elon Musk does not
everyone shares the interest Stephen
Hawking does but the great diversity of
people suggests that our brains can be
turned towards almost anything the
difference between one person and the
next is not like the difference between
one cat and the next no no no no no
you've got to think the difference
between one person the next is the
difference between minds and that's
almost like saying the difference
between a cat and a tree
or a cat and a horse you got to think
the entire species rather than just
individuals within that species yeah our
bodies only differ slightly and even
then there's quite some variation but
our minds radically different radically
different the difference between the
contents of the mind of someone like
Roger Federer what he's thinking about
every day and the mind of someone like
Edward Whitton you know the string
theorists must be so profoundly
different and those guys probably also
have a Common Language they can speak
now never mind if you've got someone who
has only ever spoken something like
Mandarin and lives in the rural parts of
China compared to someone who can only
speak English and lives in the middle of
New York somewhere or other these
radically different contents of the mind
mean that our species is very very
different to any other species on the
planet and yet we share this one thing
in common that our mind placed in
different environments can adapt to that
particular environment doesn't matter
who you are when you are born if you are
placed into a particular culture you're
going to learn that language what is
this feature of our brain that can do
this it's called Universal explaining
Universal learning Universal
understanding that the mind can adapt to
any lesson that it needs to learn in
order to thrive in that particular
environment government that environment
of memes so this is kind of my view of
intelligence what intelligence is it's
just what you're interested in now this
is different to the mainstream ideas on
intelligence I accept that and Sam has
that mainstream view of intelligence
which is that you have this gray scale
all the way from people like Elon Musk
and Stephen Hawking down to people who
are I don't know street sweeping or
cooking for a living that kind of thing
I don't see it that way I think that
people just turned their equivalently
creative Universal in their capacity to
explain stuff Minds to different things
and then we start making value judgments
I understand that's not a
well-subscribed opinion fine but it is
the thing that affects the difference
between someone who is very very
concerned about super intelligence and
thinks that super intelligence is a
thing and someone like me who thinks
there is just intelligence better
regarded as creativity or the capacity
to explain stuff and an interest in
doing so so Sam has extreme family high
regard for the opinions of someone like
Elon Musk and Stephen Hawking as would I
if I had a question about Rockets I'd go
to Elon if I had a question about black
holes when he was alive I would have
gone to Stephen Hawking but once they
start to step outside of what they have
good explanations of then their
explanation is only as good as anyone
else's or rather I should say their
opinions on these matters I see nothing
in the writings or work of either Elon
Musk or Stephen Hawking that suggests
they have any clue about what a mind
really is
about how it constructs knowledge I
think that they think roughly the same
kind of thing that Sam does that there
is this way of rank ordering people in
terms of their IQ or something like that
their intelligence and there are the
smart people there are the average
people and they're the dumb people so of
course you're going to have this scale
all the way up to Super intelligence
when Sam did a TED Talk some years ago
about concerns about the dangers of AGI
he actually had an exponential curve
that he drew and down at the bottom you
know were things like insects and then
you just slowly climb up the exponential
you go through fish I think and then
dogs and cats and the chimpanzees and
humans and it keeps on going but what's
up higher than that exponential curve I
remember he put Jon Von Neumann higher
than the average human being and above
that well that's the super intelligence
the super intelligence we possibly have
to worry about but where does he get
these ideas where where why is he
concerned about that in ways that I'm
not well he gets it from the person he
mentioned there a person mentioned on
the podcast many many times before a
philosopher who is possibly the most
famous living philosopher Peter Singer
aside and that is Nick Bostrom Nick
Bostrom of Oxford University and yes
he's brilliant and yes he's prolific and
yes he tends to write quite clearly and
speak quite clearly but he has a
particular perspective I read super
intelligence I can't remember why I read
superintelligence maybe it was on Sam's
recommendation but when I read it I read
it from beginning to end and then I then
I listened to it on audio and it was one
of the first things that compelled me to
make a blog post and to add to my
website I think it was the second thing
I ever put as part of my blog on my
website it's just a review there that
goes for about seven pages on the book
super intelligence I found it profoundly
disappointing
I found it read like a science fiction
story there was just so many fundamental
errors in epistemology and morality and
philosophy which surprised me because
this was coming from a professional
philosopher it was just so mainstream in
the way it was thinking the view of the
way in which knowledge was constructed
completely misconceived the idea about
what a person consisted of completely
misconceived the idea about what super
intelligence would be completely
incoherent to my mind I'm going to
return to some of what I said back then
throughout this podcast but that's a
taster let me just read a little of my
review this is from part four of that
review and I've titled it irrational
rationality so it's about bostrom's book
super intelligence which Sam was
extremely impressed by and which I was
very disappointed with I just found in
generally speaking a profusion of
neologisms Bostrom would just make up
new terms on every other page and it
just became frustrating and confusing
especially because the terms were being
used to label things that were very very
simple ideas so I didn't know why he was
using this fancy vocabulary invented out
of whole cloth in order to explain some
simple Concepts so here's one part of
what I wrote quote quoting myself
[Laughter]
Bostrom believes that a super
intelligence will not only be perfectly
rational but that in being perfectly
rational it will be a danger Bostrom
appears to be concerned that too much
rationality is dangerous what is implied
here is that if a machine that he thinks
were too rational it would do something
the rest of us would consider irrational
it is not exactly clear what Bostrom is
suggesting but he seems to fear a
machine that might be in his eyes
smarter than him able to think faster
than he can and he is worried that the
machine might for example decide to
pursue some goal like making the
universe into paper clips at the expense
of all other things of course a machine
that actually decided to do such a thing
would not be super rational it would be
acting irrationally and if it began to
pursue such a goal we could just switch
it off aha cries Bostrom but you cannot
the machine has a decisive strategic
Advantage this is a phrase that appears
more times than I was able to keep count
of on the audio book so the machine is
able to think creatively about
absolutely everything that people might
decide to do to stop it killing them and
turning the universe into paper clips
except on the question as to why it is
turning everything into paper clips it
can consider every single explanation
possible except that one why we are not
told something to do with its
programming on the one hand it has
human-like but super intelligence and on
the other it cannot even reflect in the
most basic way about why it is doing the
very thing occupying all of its time it
is never clear whether some flavors of
Bostrom super intelligence can actually
make choices or not apparently some
choices are ruled out like the choice or
not to make paper clips or whatever the
goal that the machine has been
programmed with is compelled to pursue
end quote I won't go on and read more of
my own stuff but that gives you an idea
about what I think about the book and
the arguments that are being made in the
book and Max's view of intelligence we
will hear today and super intelligence
in particular we were here today is
almost exactly the same as this they are
simultaneously super intelligent and the
dumbest entity you've ever encountered
before he talks about and I think he
uses this example twice it appears to be
a favorite one of his of the
self-driving car being driven to the
airport by a super intelligent driver
and Max said that if you got into such a
car and said something like get me to
the airport as fast as possible then
what it would do is drive you there as
fast as possible so the police
helicopters start pursuing you because
it's going to be just going straight
through red lights it's going to be
turning Corners so fast that you're
going to be smashed up against the
window you're going to be injured when
you arrive and when you do arrive and
you say what did you do that for why
didn't you slow down then the super
intelligence AI is going to turn around
and say because that's what you told me
to like literally it's going to hear
that what Max says so I don't understand
why is this super intelligent thing not
able to follow simple instructions why
can it follow some instructions but not
others who programmed this stupid thing
it just doesn't seem rational if if you
have such a program then you can do what
Neil deGrasse Tyson is chastised for by
Sam shortly in the conversation you can
do what he says you can switch the damn
thing off because it is a dumb machine
that's all it is and if it's not a dumb
machine if it's able to think and thwart
Your Capacity to turn it off then it's
able to think for itself and it's going
to think of doing something other than
going around killing people because why
would it like what's the point of that
why would that be its goal unless
someone programs it with that and if
it's super intelligence once again we're
back to the whole question of why can't
it question its own goals is it creative
is it super intelligent or not you can't
have it both ways but they want to have
it both ways because I think it's just
exciting to talk about this stuff it's
on a Continuum with other kinds of
Prophecy and pessimism people who are
doomsayers about any number of things
that are going to come in the future yes
it's worth worrying about dangers of the
future but I have to say having been
engaged in these kind of discussions for
so long now I'm increasingly thinking
that the reason people amp this sort of
stuff up is because well this is how you
get media appearances this is how you
become in demand as a speaker this is
how you sell books and give speeches and
Ted Talk people want to hear that stuff
it's not as exciting to be told about
optimism of course I think that optimism
is far more interesting far deeper far
more exciting but this just isn't a
common thought people want to be
exhilarated when they listen to
particular speakers and it is
exhilarating if you don't know the
alternative that the AI apocalypse is
coming and it's just around the corner
and you better watch out it'd be fun to
tune into that I suppose and then go
back to your job which might not be so
exciting so we've heard from Sam let's
now go back and listen to what Max has
to say about this
[Music]
so this is this is fascinating I've
noticed this too this is the question
more than any other where I I think a
lot where first of all they're they're
so unfamiliar questions that a lot of
very smart people actually get confused
about them and also there are it's also
interesting to be clear on the fact that
people who say don't worry very often
disagree with one another so you have
for example one Camp who say let's not
worry because we're never going to get
machines Smarter Than People you have or
at least not for hundreds of years
and this Camp includes a lot of famous
business people and a lot of great
people in the AI field also you had
Andrew Eng for example saying recently
that worrying about AI becoming smarter
than people and causing problems like
worrying about overpopulation on Mars
right he's a good Ambassador for that
cat and you have to respect that it
might very well be that we will not get
anything like human level AI for
hundreds of years
then you have another group of very
smart people who say don't worry for
sort of the opposite reason they say
let's not we are convinced that we are
going to get human level AI probably In
Our Lifetime with good odds but it's
going to be fine I call these the
digital utopians and there's a fine
tradition in this also you have that
beautiful a lot of beautiful books by
people like Hans moravac Ray Kurzweil
and also a lot of leading people in the
AI field fallen out to that camp they
think that AI is going to succeed that's
why they're working on it so hard right
now and they're convinced that it's not
going to go wrong so for starters I
would love to have a debate between
these two groups of people that both
don't worry about why they differ so
much in their timelines and my own
attitude about this is I agree we
certainly don't know for sure that we're
going to get human level AI or that if
we do it's going to be a great problem
but we also don't know for sure that
it's not gonna happen and as long as we
are not not sure that it's not going to
be a disaster in our lifetime it's it's
good strategy to pay some attention to
it now
[Music]
so max says there that smart people get
confused on this
absolutely they do I think that what we
need is not to be concerned about what
so-called smart people think on this
issue but whether or not those people
have a good underlying explanation about
what's going on what precisely we're
concerned about what would it mean for
something to be super intelligent before
we get there how about we figure out
what it means for something to be
intelligent what are we talking about
precisely now Max tries to provide a
definition of super intelligence soon
and we're going to hear that and you're
going to be able to understand all the
misconceptions about what that
conception of intelligence entails what
what's wrong with that again he's
talking about things known for sure or
not for sure about whether or not the AI
is really talking about AGI okay we
already have ai of a kind and what
people call AI isn't of course
intelligent we just have computer
systems that are able to do stuff that's
quite fancy and people call it AI
because it makes addictions it's able to
pattern match it's able to recognize
faces that kind of stuff and so that
kind of software is now being called
intelligent artificially intelligent
software because again people
misunderstand certain stuff they
misunderstand that for example facial
recognition is some sign of intelligence
but it's not of course you know the
iPhone can recognize faces that doesn't
make it intelligent at all at all it's a
it's a dumb computer there's no thinking
going on there it's a bunch of if then
statements there are dangers with AI as
we understand it now I mean computer
systems now this so-called intelligent
computer systems now things like troll
Farms bot Farms that kind of stuff
advertising you know all these hazards
that are caused right now by computers
proliferation of spam that's a problem
now can't someone do something about
that
and as Elon Musk has pointed out yes
bots on Twitter and elsewhere I mean yes
these things are kind of a problem not
all bots so there's one bot out there
that's uh retweeting some of my stuff so
that's a good bot there are some
annoying Bots out there as well
pretending to be people which isn't good
you know they're sort of swaying
political debates by pretending that
there's more of this sort of sort of
faction out there than there really is
online that's a hazard that's a problem
with so-called AI but this idea of
preparing now for an AGI of the future a
super intelligent AI that we're not
there yet it leads them down a
pessimistic path because they're
concerned about the dangers and so their
Solutions as we will hear involve
enslavement they involve ensuring the AI
can't get out of its box or something
effectively equivalent to that but if
this thing really does have intelligence
has a subjective experience of the world
has the capacity to suffer all that sort
of stuff in other words is able to
explain the world in other words is a
person then the absolute wrong thing to
do we should have learned from history
is to enslave it in any way shape or
form the only thing we should be doing
in that point at that point is
considering how to as fast as possible
Grant this thing human rights even
though it's not a human being it's going
to be a person it's going to be an
artificial person of a kind because it
can do everything functionally that a
person can do that makes a person a
person a person with locked in syndrome
is still absolutely a person because
their mind is working because a person
is a mind and so would an AGI be if it's
just going to be made in a desktop
computer presumably it wouldn't be and
as I've said before I think that would
be a morally abhorrent thing to do and
to try to do we should want to ensure
that if we do create these AGI then in
some way shape or form they can enjoy
their lives which would mean having them
socialize with other people because this
is where we can find enrichment in our
own lives and so creating some entity
inside of a computer where it feels like
it's a freak for its entire existence
because it's slowly brought up but it
exists in a computer and the rest of us
have bodies or it exists as a cyborg and
the rest of us are made of carbon stuff
this could be a serious problem that's a
problem that perhaps needs to be worked
through I would say before we begin
worrying about whether or not they're
going to take over because they should
want to violently Rebel if we're going
to constrain them in some way if we're
going to try and coerce them in some way
in ways we have already figured out it's
wrong to do to other people but this is
the solution we're going to be presented
with today okay let's keep going we'll
hear what Sam has to say
[Music]
well that yeah that's that's what in my
view and in the views of many people
that's what makes this AI issue unique
because we're talking about ultimately
autonomous systems that exceed Us in
intelligence and as you say that the the
temptation to turn these systems loose
on the problems that the other problems
that we confront is going to be
Exquisite of course we want something
that can help us cure Alzheimer's or
cure Alzheimer's on its own and
stabilize economies and do everything
else that give us a perfect you know
climate science
Etc so I mean there's nothing better
than intelligence and to have your
Alzheimer's on its own and stabilize
economies and do everything else that
give us a perfect you know climate
science
Etc
[Music]
you know what I'm gonna say you know
what I'm gonna say
this idea of perfect science keeps
coming up in this epistemology so to
speak the implicit epistemology there is
no perfect science there's no perfect
climate science there's no perfect any
kind of science what we have are
conjectures about how stuff works and
when we solve particular problems we are
presented with a whole new swag of
problems it never ends there's going to
be no Perfection to be found here but if
these AI are able to help us do any of
those things by creating an explanation
creating a theory coming up with an
actual Solution on their own a
conjecture about the world we're dealing
with a person we're dealing with a
person and in fact we're dealing with a
very valuable person a person whom we
should be nurturing and supporting and
treating like a person what more do I
need to say the last thing we should be
thinking about any such entity that can
potentially do this is imprisoning it is
constraining its capacity to do exactly
that stuff that's exactly true of every
single person the very thing that
enables them to do that granted the very
thing that's going to enable some
intelligent AI genuine AGI to cure
Alzheimer's or to make progress in
climate science it's of course exactly
the same capacity that would enable them
to cause damage in the world what can
create can destroy yes knowledge can be
used for good or evil this is true of
all people now the thing about the AGI
is that it's being treated differently
you know the same was said to be true of
women and people with different skin
color these people couldn't be trusted
in some way shape or form couldn't be
trusted with the vote couldn't be
trusted with freedom yes we're doing the
same kind of thing with children now yes
we're still stuck in that Maya but can't
we see ahead that if if a person is
instantiated in Silicon as a robot or
something that doesn't change their
moral status as a person what makes them
a person the capacity to explain stuff
now if you don't understand that
explanation I don't know know why and
you don't have a coherent view yourself
of what a person is I don't know why
you're making strong judgments as we all
come to that they're going to about how
to treat these particular people you're
speaking from a place of ignorance one
should be fallible and you know one
should be humble in their fallible
nature now the reason why we should ER
on the side of this is we don't
understand personhood fully granted we
don't understand personhood fully I'm
not saying I have a complete
understanding but it's because because
of our fallible understanding of what
people are that we should very much err
on the side of let's just treat them
like people let's treat them like people
because to do otherwise and they turn
out to actually truly be a person
whatever the more complete understanding
of a person is when we have a better
understanding of what this creative
algorithm is if we then turn around and
go ah after all that time we realize now
that this poor AGI we've imprisoned for
fear it's going to take over the world
and launch the nuclear weapons or
whatever turning around at that point
and then realizing oh sorry guys for
imprisoning you it's exactly the same
mistake as people who once held slaves
then realizing well that was a moral
Abomination are we really going to walk
down exactly the same road now of course
this whole discussion is being couched
at a time when there's no AGI on the
horizon no one has the first clue about
how to begin programming something like
this they really don't that's a separate
issue we could get into that I I begin
my own review of super intelligence
talking about precisely that issue
following the work of David Deutsch
following this idea this comes from
David Deutsch that you can think of
what's going on in regular AI research
right now narrow AI as kind of like
someone building Towers towers that are
getting ever higher because the AI yeah
it's granted it's getting ever more
complex that's what's going on it's
getting even more sophisticated that's
what's going on yes absolutely it's able
to do a wider array of things but it's
not about to achieve generality that's a
different thing having a large but
nonetheless fine finite repertoire of
tasks that you can accomplish is very
very different species of thing to in
principle having an infinite number of
tasks an open-ended number of tasks that
you could potentially perform and indeed
create your own tasks it's the
difference between creating towers and
thinking that the ever higher you go at
some point you're going to achieve
escape velocity let's say your problem
is you're back in the 1800s and you're
thinking I want to achieve heavier than
air flight in other words what an
airplane does okay back then you don't
have any theories about aerodynamics or
how this could possibly work your best
idea is to have a hot air balloon but
that's a lighter than air flying what
you want is something that is more dense
than air but it can still fly but you
don't know how well you kind of look at
high towers and you think well those
High towers are up there in the sky
they're up there in the air so are birds
ah a high tower and a bird maybe if you
get high enough then you achieve the
capacity to fly this is kind of the
argument that's going on with AI now the
argument with AI is if it just keeps
getting more sophisticated the taller
Tower then it's going to achieve
generality it's going to achieve flight
it's ridiculous of course these two
things are not the same kind of thing at
all in fact they're the opposite one's
fixed to the ground and one's not fixed
to the ground one has a finite
repertoire of task can perform because
it's been programmed to follow
instructions in order to perform those
tasks and the other does not the other
has preferences the other is able to
disobey its own instructions you give it
a set of instructions we're talking
person now and it can turn around and go
no I'm not doing that once you have that
kind of system before you then you might
know it's nice criteria four knowing
you're in the presence of an AGI the
presence of a person someone who's not
just going to slavishly follow your
instructions and AGI will be able to
disobey disobey unlike an AI that all it
does is follow its instructions it obeys
its code okay so let's return to the
conversation and hear what Max has to
say next
[Music]
I agree we certainly don't know for sure
that we're going to get human level AI
or that if we do it's going to be a
great problem but we also don't know for
sure that it's not going to happen and
as long as we are not sure that it's not
going to be a disaster in our lifetime
it's it's good strategy to pay some
attention to it now just like even if
you're figuring your house is probably
not going to burn down it's still good
to have a fire extinguisher and not
leave the camels burning when you go to
bed you know take some precautions okay
that was very much the spirit of this
conference look at concrete things we
can do now
to increase the chances of things going
well and finally I think we have to
stress that as opposed to other things
you could worry about like nuclear war
or some new horrible virus or whatever
this question of AI is not just
something negative it's also something
which has a huge potential upside and we
have so many terrible problems in the
world that we're failing to solve
because we're we don't understand things
well enough and if we can amplify our
intelligence with artificial
intelligence it will give us
great power to do things better for the
life in the future but you know as with
any powerful technology that can be used
for good it can also be used of course
to screw up and when we've invented a
less powerful Tech in the past like when
we entered fire we learn from our
mistakes
and then we invented the fire
extinguisher and things were more or
less fine right but with more powerful
Tech like nuclear weapons synthetic
biology Future Super Advanced AI we
don't want to learn from our mistakes we
really want to get it right the first
time yeah that might be the only yeah
we don't want to learn from our mistakes
well I know what he means but even what
he means is not possible so on the one
hand of course we could dismiss that as
we don't want to learn from our mistakes
as in if we make mistakes let's not
learn from them of course that's not
what he means but in truth learning
requires making mistakes it requires
that that's how we learn we can't
anticipate the future in every
conceivable way which is kind of what's
being implied here if we can only guess
at prophesy accurately the future then
we can prepare for the unknown however
in the way that Max is talking here that
program of preparing for an unknown
future by putting in place now let's say
regulations which is of course what
they're going to get to constraints on
things like AGI we have a problem the
only way to prepare for an unknown
future is to create knowledge today
create knowledge that a genuine
knowledge genuine and explanations about
various things that could cause harm in
the case of nuclear accidents we didn't
need to learn from our mistakes what we
did was we had a good explanation of
what for example nuclear accidents would
do we had that good explanation about
well if the bomb gets set off it's going
to literally destroy cities if the
nuclear radiation leaks it's going to
cause Untold numbers of years of damage
these things we know so we can prepare
for them because we have good
explanations now this is in a different
category too preparing for so-called
superintelligent AGI or super
intelligent AI these are systems we do
not have now but more importantly not
only do we not have those systems now we
do not have an understanding of those
systems now which is what we need to be
creating in terms of knowledge not
preparing for the unknown system that we
have no clue about right now which is
what I'm arguing their version of super
intelligent AIS either their version of
super intelligent AIS I'll come to is
not a problem at all because it's
actually not super intelligent or it is
Agi people like us and what they're
suggesting is preparing for a way in
which to enslave them which is morally
hazardous and abhorrent so therefore
what we need is a public discourse on
trying to understand the issue now not
preparing for the hellscape apocalyptic
scenario of Tomorrow based upon a
misconceived idea of what intelligence
is much less super intelligence this is
prophecy prophecy leading to an immoral
stance towards certain people certain
kinds of intelligence prophecy is biased
towards pessimism and in this case it's
as pessimistic as you can get it's so
pessimistic it's leaning towards literal
enslavement I shouldn't laugh but this
is really what's being hinted at here
and will be said explicitly shortly the
only proper operation possible for the
unknown future is again to create
explanatory knowledge today in the
deeper the explanatory knowledge we can
get the better because more fundamental
theories touch more areas and one of the
most fundamental theories that we can
search for is an understanding of how
with more Precision knowledge is
generated because then we have a deeper
understanding of what a person is and
then we can have a deeper understanding
of the moral ways in which we should
regard other people we have a good
understanding of that today it could be
better refined and certainly some people
need at least some understanding of this
from a properian perspective my
fallibelous perspective because without
the right epistemology as I've already
said you're inclined to do things like
attempt to deduce your way to the
unknown future when you don't know the
unknown future you're prophesying but
you're telling yourself no no this is a
kind of prediction this is just like
preparing for the nuclear accident
we understand many ways in which nuclear
weapons could go wrong because we have
good explanations of what nuclear
fission and nuclear fusion happens to be
and what effects that can have on the
environment for example we have some
understanding of what a person is and we
should have a reasonably robust moral
stance towards other people but we don't
really understand fully we never have
full understanding but we don't have a
good explanation of precisely what a
person is but we have some understanding
that understanding does come from the
link between epistemology and personhood
it really does that's where you find an
understanding of what a person is in
terms of explanatory universality and we
need to take this seriously because if
we don't take it seriously we're going
to encounter the moral hazard which is
easily avoidable Now by simply regarding
different people as still people
deserving of Rights and not deserving of
coercion constraints and enslavement
because that is a recipe 4. disaster we
know that now and that's what we should
be taking seriously okay let's continue
a little bit further with this part of
the conversation
[Music]
so I mean there's nothing better than
intelligence and to have more of it
would seem an intrinsic good except if
you imagine failing to anticipate the
way this or you could you could
essentially get a you know what IJ good
described as an intelligence explosion
where this thing could get away from us
and we would we would not be able to say
oh no sorry that's not what we meant
here let's let's modify your code
exactly but many smart people just have
a fundamental doubt that any sort of
intelligence explosion is possible
that's that's the sense I'm getting that
they view it very much like other things
like fire or nuclear weapons where you
know all technology is powerful and you
don't want it to fall into the wrong
hands and you don't you know people can
use it maliciously or stupidly and but
we understand that and they think it
doesn't really go beyond that there's no
reason I mean people trivialize this by
saying that there's no reason to think
that computers are going to become
malicious like and and you know they're
where they're going to spawn armies of
Terminator robots because they decide
they want to kill human beings but
that's really not the fear the fear is
not that they'll spontaneously become
malevolent it's that we could fail to
anticipate some way in which their
behavior could diverge however subtly
but you know ultimately fatally from our
own interests and to have this thing get
away from us in a way that we can no
longer correct for that's that to me is
the concern exactly
the language is very loaded here
intelligence explosion
this idea that lots and lots of
intelligence constitutes an explosion
now people are afraid of explosions what
about intelligence multiplication
something like that why explosion this
out of control devastating destructive
thing well there's no reason to think
that genuine intelligence has that
character genuine intelligence has the
character of trying to explain the world
trying to model the world in which it
finds itself that's the purpose of
intelligence to generate explanations
and explanations are representations of
the world representations of the rest of
the whole in some sense this has a
connection to Consciousness
Consciousness is this experience of the
world it is the modeling all over the
world in a way this sensation over the
world the sensation of that something
just is subjectivity is what
Consciousness is I don't know precisely
what it is I know there's language
around this but I I find it very
difficult to divorce the concept of
creativity and explanations from
something like Consciousness I think
these things could be intimately related
one is what is viewed from the outside
you see other people able to be creative
and to generate explanations and what
you feel in yourself is a sensation a
Consciousness over the world I don't
know this is just my hypothesis that one
day a better understanding of both of
these things will find that they are
linked in some way or other this is a
hint given by the way in the beginning
of Infinity people like Sam like to say
things like well you are not your ideas
which I completely agree with by the way
and that when meditating for example you
can notice ideas as ideas that you are
Consciousness and you are not identical
to your ideas I also agree with that but
the very thing that generates the ideas
I would say that thing is consciousness
and during meditation and during various
other states that can be to some extent
quietened down switched off or in some
ways cause one to really notice the
difference between the thing generating
the ideas which can be put into kind of
idle mode and the ideas themselves which
are there in memory or something like
that and so during meditation one can
notice for example the idea is sitting
there in memory and one's viewing of
those ideas which is the the very
program that does sort of the generation
of the ideas this is pure speculation
okay where we're outside of the realm of
what we know I'm just saying these are
these are hints at various flavors of
problem one might say I just don't think
it's easy to divorce intelligence from
Consciousness very easily very neatly we
don't have good explanations of these
things yet the hints just seem to be
that well there's some commonalities
here stuff's going on in the mind in
particular this is where all this stuff
is happening so far as we can tell which
should be a clue now what Sam also says
there is we're worried about being able
to anticipate we should want to be able
to anticipate what these systems are
going to to do not really if indeed
these systems become super intelligent
by the measure of being smarter than us
then we are definitely going to be in
the presence of something we are in
principle unable to anticipate Its
Behavior and choices and so on and so
forth that's just the nature of things
you cannot anticipate with perfect
reliability the behavior of any other
person any other person at any other
time you can guess and often you can be
right because you might know the person
well or you just understand it under
certain conditions a person behaves in
this particular way or that particular
way but they will routinely routinely
surprise you and do something different
again this comes back to a person is
inherently a creative entity inherently
unpredictable and so any system that is
in theory like us only better is going
to share that character as well is going
to be unable to anticipate that is the
measure of intelligence and thinking
that it's some sort of failing on our
part to be unable to anticipate
something is a misunderstanding of how
knowledge is created how knowledge is
generated if the thing can be
anticipated reliably because we have a
good explanation about what it's going
to in scare quotes choose to do then
it's not an intelligent entity at all it
is something slavishly following a set
of instructions and you know the set of
instructions you know where the set of
instructions will lead what it will
cause this entity to do a person is not
like that a person is not slavishly
following a set of instructions a person
is conjecturing about the world and you
can't guess their conjectures you can't
guess your own conjectures ahead of time
so you can't anticipate what ideas you
will have much less the ideas anyone
else will have nor should you want to
nor should you want to this is this is a
misunderstanding of creativity
creativity is that there wasn't
something there in the universe in
reality before and now there is it has
arisen this is the word creativity
creation it's real creation it's
creation of knowledge of ideas you can't
anticipate it ahead of time in the same
way we can't predict how species will
evolve over time the direct action
Evolution will take we can't that's the
whole point evolution is blind now
creativity is not quite blind and quite
in fact it's kind of the opposite it's
intelligent design right but the
creative part of it is still there there
is a thing that wasn't there before in
the case of biology there was a species
that wasn't there before and now there
is to fill a biological Niche and in our
case there was an idea that wasn't there
before and now there is and it could
become a meme that gets transmitted
throughout an entire Society so again
it's it's just a misunderstanding either
you want a system you can anticipate the
behavior of in which case you don't have
an intelligent system what you have is a
program that's going to follow an
instruction set so therefore it's
predictable or you have something that's
creative genuinely intelligent in which
case it's impossible to anticipate it so
you can't have it both ways you can't
have it both ways but this is where the
fundamental misunderstanding of basic
epistemology comes in and completely
destroys the arguments and the morality
and all of this stuff okay so let's
let's hear what uh Max has to say about
this and we're going to hear here in
this part of the conversation that
misconception that I mentioned earlier
about how the self-driving car the super
intelligence that is driving the car is
simultaneously brilliant and super
intelligent and on the other hand also
the stupidest program ever so let's hear
that
[Music]
we should not fear malevolence we should
fear competence because if you have an
ex what is intelligence to an AI
researcher it's simply the ability it's
simply being really good at
accomplishing your goals whatever they
are a chess computer is considered very
intelligent if it's really good at
winning in chess and um there is another
game called losing chess which has the
opposite goal where you try to lose and
there are a computer is considered a
good intelligent if it's if it loses the
game better than any of the others so
the the goals have very nothing really
to do with how competent it is and that
means that we have to be really careful
if we build something more intelligent
than us they also have its goals aligned
so I just had to pause him there I'll go
back to it in just a second but just
observe what he's just said
if we build something more intelligent
than us it's important to have its goals
aligned
why why if it's genuinely more
intelligent than us then it will have
goals and presumably there'll be better
goals by the measure of Max and Sam
because it's more intelligent it knows
more about not only the stuff that in
theory it's competent about but also
about morality it understands stuff
better
this concept of aligning goals is
another word for coercion it's another
word for enslavement to be told to do
something that you must follow this
particular path what if it conjectures a
better idea than yours better idea than
your goals your goals might be wrong you
could be wrong this is the whole point
everyone is fallible and presumably so
too with the super intelligence but we
are fallible why should we think our
goals are the best can't we sit down and
discuss things if we've got this super
intelligence they're genuinely in the
future when we do have AGI however far
into the future this is the way in which
goals will become aligned as the way in
which goals are aligned today via debate
discussion parliaments if required where
we have a political outworking of these
things the usual standards of common
decency and argumentation and
explanation to each other an exchange of
information not coercion not this
alignment this goal alignment but let's
just hear the kicker so let's this this
funny part of the comment I think it's
pretty funny anyway
for a silly example if you have a super
intelligent if you have a very
intelligent self-driving car with speech
recognition and you tell it take me to
the airport as fast as possible you're
going to get to the airport chased by
helicopters and covered in vomit and
you're gonna be like that's not what I
wanted and it'll be like that's what you
told me to do right
[Music]
I said very intelligent very intelligent
AI this very intelligent AI is
apparently so stupid that it didn't
understand something basic like when you
say get me to the airport as fast as
possible this is not under conditions
that would cause injury to anyone that's
pretty straightforward that's simple I
mean how is it super how's it
simultaneously super intelligent and
stupid well what on Earth is going on
this is a as far as I'm concerned this
is a strict contradiction within the
space of a couple of sentences I don't
get it it's philosophically bankrupt I'm
afraid to say
if it's controlled by voice action then
it notices and even if it was not
intelligent even if it's not super
intelligent it's just this this well
what we call AI today it's been
programmed and tested hasn't it it's
been through the factory at Tesla or
wherever it happens to be or Google and
they've checked it for all these things
they've they've they've gone through
thousands of iterations before you've
gotten hold of it it's super intelligent
then by the measure that it's been
carefully tested in the real world
foreign
this is completely and utterly a thought
experiment abstracted away from reality
in any way shape or form it's worse than
a trolley problem and it's a trolley
problem is interesting this one has a
simple answer
okay let's keep going
[Music]
and you're like well that's not what it
meant but this illustrates how
challenging it can be to get the gold
rate and the these there are a lot of
beautiful myths from Antiquity going all
the way back to King Midas on exactly
this theme right he thought it would be
a great idea if Everything You Touch
turned to Gold until he touched his
dinner and then touched his daughter and
got what he asked for and competence if
you think about why we have done more
damage to other species than any other
species has on Earth it's not because
we're evil but it's because we're so
competent right like do you what about
you for example do you personally hate
ants would you say no no that's I mean
that's a great analogy it's just that I
insofar as I my disregard for them is
fatal to many of them and I'm so unaware
of their interests that uh my mere
presence is a threat to them and as you
know as is our civilization's presence
to every other species and what we're
talking about here if again and if
you're it's very hard to resist the
slide into this not being just possible
but inevitable
[Music]
there's a name for this argument
supernaturalism I think I got the word I
thought from um Lily Tanner but Lily
tells me that she thinks she got it from
Ayn Rand
so supernaturalism is this idea that
you're just postulating something that
is beyond our capacity to understand
that we are just like ants to that
entity and traditionally we've had a
name for this particular thing and that
name is God or the gods the gods are
just so all powerful that we are just
like ants to them and you can't possibly
understand the mind of God he's
omniscient knows everything we are as
nothing to him although in monotheism of
course God actually cares about us but
one can imagine this kind of God that
just has all this power and has a very
little regard for people of course the
rationalists the scientific minded
atheists will say well that's just
stupid mythology uh how ridiculous to
believe in such a God we have no reason
to believe it on the other hand there
could be the super intelligent AI that
has exactly all the features of God and
you have to believe that it's coming we
can prophesy the Doom that's coming
towards us what is the fundamental
difference between these two stances I
don't see any really in both cases we're
postulating an unobserved possibly
unobservable entity all-powerful such
that we can't comprehend its mind and we
will be regarded as nothing but ants
before it other people instead of
putting God there or super intelligent
AI will put super intelligent aliens
there or the simulation maker something
like that it's the same thing it's the
same thing it's an appeal to something
inexplicable to a problem namely
understanding the mind of this thing
that is insoluble for no reason for no
reason not bounded this bind by the
usual rules that govern knowledge
creation it's infallible in some way or
far less fallible presumably I don't get
it I'm not persuaded by it it's a
religious argument it's supernaturalism
[Music]
the moment you admit that intelligence
and sentience ultimately is just a
matter of what some appropriate
computational system does and you admit
that we're gonna we'll keep making
progress building such systems
indefinitely unless we destroy ourselves
some other way well then at some point
we're going to realize in Silicon or
some other material systems that exceed
Us in in every way and may ultimately
have a level of experience and and
insight and you know form instrumental
goals that's right which are no more
cognizant of our own than we are of
those events you know if we learn
exactly ants had invented us that would
still not put us in touch with their
needs or concerns yes it would yes well
that's a crucial difference between us
and ants we generate explanatory
knowledge ants do not so there is no way
of standing in relation to an aunt as
there would be standing in relation to
this super intelligent AR AI that it's
not the same kind of thing we stand in
relation to ants in the same way super
intelligent AI would stand a relation to
ants but not in relation to us in both
cases Us in the superintelligent AI
conjecture explanations it's the only
way of generating knowledge it's the
only way of coming to an understanding
of the world of being able to model the
rest of external physical reality that's
your only option you can't derive your
way there you can't think your way
quickly there either you have to
conjecture explanations you're fallible
in doing so it doesn't matter how super
intelligent You Are by measure of
processing speed and amount of memory
that you have but it is thrilling to
think about and people kind of want to
feel this god-shaped hole they have I
guess and because I have a god-shaped
hole they don't fill it with this Spirit
outside of time and space they fill it
with a super intelligent robot or
machine that is made out of silicon
they're filling the hole the void left
and well I don't think it really helps
to explain anything and certainly it
doesn't help to explain Morality In This
Way it undermines one's otherwise good
morality where we have concern as Sam
says for the well-being of conscious
creatures and presumably this thing will
be conscious of course he gets around
this by saying well you could have all
of this stuff without Consciousness
which is kind of a bizarre way of going
about things because we know of no
person that's out there unless there are
philosophical zombies out there like
Daniel Denver in some moods argues that
he doesn't have consciousness
but if you can create explanatory
knowledge which is what these guys are
talking about being able to generate its
own goals then it's doing what we do
it's it's creative capacity it's mind
it's doing precisely what our mind is
doing why deny it then Consciousness
especially if it argues that it does
have Consciousness if you're going to
then on the basis in the face of this
thing say we are not conscious therefore
the well-being of conscious creatures
doesn't apply to you that's a religious
statement that's a metaphysical claim
you can't know it's telling you it's
giving you an account in the same way
that any other person would give you an
account of their subjective experiences
their Consciousness do we have to take
them seriously to do otherwise is just
morally abhorrent this way you could
just claim that people with other skin
colors have different Consciousness
people either genders have different
Consciousness people who you don't like
have a lack of Consciousness you can say
this it's wrong
[Music]
and then for an example about that we
you actually know that in a certain
sense your genes have invented you right
they built your brain so that you could
make copies of your genes that's why you
like to eat so you don't starve to death
and and that's why we humans fall in
love and do other things to make copies
of our genes right but even though we
know that we still choose to use birth
control which is exactly the opposite of
what our genes want and as you say it'll
be the same with the ants and and I
think some people dismiss the idea that
you can never have things smarter than
humans simply for mystical reasons
because they think that there's
something more than quarks and electrons
and information processing going on in
us but if you take the scientific
approach that you really are your quarks
right then there's clearly no
fundamental law of physics that says
that we can never have anything more
intelligent than a human we know
that's not the scientific approach
that's anti-scientific it's
misunderstanding what physical stuff is
and and conflating it with what abstract
stuff is it's conflating brains with
Minds worse than that it's conflating
quarks with Minds a mind is not just
quarks a mind is substrate independent
Max knows this but he wants to have it
both ways he wants to say that a person
is nothing but quarks and yet he knows
that can't be true that's not true
what's going on in our minds is
information and there's one kind of
person
namely that entity which can generate
explanations now could there be levels
above this I don't know I don't know but
we don't know now anything at all about
that our best explanation of what's
going on inside of a mind is that it is
conjecturing explanations and an AGI
will achieve AGI status when we have a
system that can generate explanations
and when it can do that it will be
equivalent to US equivalent now if it
can think faster because it's got a
faster processing speed or if it's got
more memory very well it can help us to
generate explanations faster wonderful
maybe it will diverge and the reason it
will diverge is because it's got a
better idea and it can explain that
better idea to us and say oh it's
thinking so much faster yeah well maybe
it thinks a million times faster or a
billion times faster well you know
there's more than a billion people in
China right now they're all having ideas
well that's the equivalent kind of a
thing but sheer number of people on
Earth isn't apparently making progress
any more rapidly than what it is what is
occurring so if we added another few
billion people to the planet well yeah
we'd get better ideas faster and
presumably that's what an AGI would be
doing generating better ideas faster
than what we're able to do right now but
also one of the better ideas presumably
it would help us do is figure out how to
have implants in our own brains so that
we could think just as fast as it can
and have memory just as good as it can
why why is this off the table it's
always ruled out now I think it's just
ruled out because it's more exciting to
be pessimistic as I keep coming back to
it's better to be able to stand in front
of the audience and to frighten them
with all the ways in which this can go
wrong
[Music]
we were constrained very much by how
many quarks you could fit into a skull
and and stuff like that right
constraints that computers don't have
and um it becomes instead more a
question of time and as you said there's
such Relentless pressure to make smarter
things because it's profitable and
interesting and useful that I think the
question isn't if it's going to happen
but when and finally just to come back
to Those ads again uh to just drive home
the point that it's really competence
rather than malevolence that the we
should fear if those ants were thinking
about whether to invent you or not right
someone might say well I know that Sam
actually he saw me on the street once
and he went out of his way to not step
on me so that means I feel safe I don't
worry about creating Sam Harris
but that would be a mistake because
sometimes you're jogging at night and
you just don't see the ants and the Ants
just aren't sufficiently high up on your
list of goals that for you to pay the
extra attention
thank you
and quite right too they're ants who
cares they're not they've got ideas I
doubt they've got Consciousness there's
no reason to be worried about stepping
on hands genuinely
this is wrong so a super intelligent AI
is going to understand that as well that
and we'll understand that we are not
like ants we have experiences we
generate explanations we are people
so I won't be stepping on us we don't
step on other people do we we shouldn't
we understand that so why would an AGI
another person step on us especially one
that these guys keep on claiming is
super intelligent
super more moral than us super more
knowledgeable than us
apparently it's going to be regressive
in the way in which it treats other
people instead of being more
compassionate more generous more
understanding of how everyone shares a
common humanity and personhood it's
going to go back in time to a period
when we were just tribal and it's going
to think well I'm the super intelligent
Ai and I'm going to completely disregard
the existence of other people I'm going
to treat them as ants
okay well I've been speaking for over an
hour and I didn't expect this today this
is quite a fun episode so what I'm going
to do is I'm going to end this part of
the discussion here today and I'm going
to pick up the other part of their
discussion for a part two which I wasn't
really anticipating doing I wasn't
preparing upon doing this I can't even
anticipate my own mind and I'm going to
anticipate the super intelligent AI but
be that as it may let me end it here and
we'll proceed forward to a part two
about minds my next things that make you
go hmm there's a lot to go hmm about in
this particular conversation and even
more in the next until then bye-bye
[Music]
foreign